
thank you so much for your call. Below is information on our Home Equity Line of Credit that I shared with you over the phone. At the end, I include a paragraph with bullets on things to think about as you talk with your local bank: 

With regards to the Second Act Home Equity Line of Credit, or HELOC:

    Second Act is a senior-focused division of Liberty Savings Bank, a family owned bank out of Wilmington, OH in business since 1889. 

    We are known by senior living communities because we specialize on this need and accommodate seniors and their families in ways that show we understand. 

    We are known for speed, service, and few surprises if any along the way, in an application. We also are known to make life a little easier with POAs and POA documents. 



    The difficult part of this is that it's expensive because of the existing mortgage we would need to pay off and the pricing due to the short-term nature of this loan when you include the mortgage balance we'd be rolling in.

    The benefit, as we discussed, is that he is likely to get this back with a better offer on the house if the real estate agent had time to do what they should do, to make the home look its best before photographing it and listing it.



    The pricing is as follows:

        Prime +2.99%. Prime right now is 7.50%. Adding 2.99% makes it 10.49%. 

            10.49%/12 = monthly rate of 0.874% (on a calculator it's 0.00874 x $_Loan-Balance)

            Monthly payments are about $9 for every $1,000 borrowed and outstanding. I've attached a table for the HELOC that shows what payments would look like. 

                The starting balance is $117,000 + $6,000 = $123,000 (once we pay off his existing mortgage, he would not have a payment due there. He would have just one paymen to Second Act) 

                I then for simplicity's sake added $6,000 a month that needs to be borrowed.


        Origination fee based on credit score of:

            3% of line of credit amount if his credit score is 720+

            4% of line of credit amount if his credit score is between 669 - 719

            4.50% of line of credit limit if his credit score is between 620 to 669.




        On a Home Equity Line any lender would have the below processing steps/costs that are, by law, passed on at cost.


                Lenders are not allowed to mark the below costs up beyond their exact cost: Please note these fees are processing fees.

                    Many banks "eat" these fees but they require you to hold your line open for a minimum period which is frequently 18 to 24 months so you pay interest for that amount of time and they recoup the fronting of these fees.


                Title Company fee of $750

                Title Insurance is about $5 for every $1,000 loaned. On $153,000 line I estimate that to come in around $765

                Virtual appraisal fee of $21 or so 

                Credit Pull fee of $20 or so per applicant

                There may be a small county recording fee or other cost. One of our Lending Chaperones would have to provide the legally required estimate about receipt of an application.


I've attached an example assuming your dad's credit score is 720 or higher. Please note the above is not the official legally required and binding quote of terms and fees.

If you decided to apply for a Second Act Home Equity Line, one of our assigned Lending Chaperones would provide the official estimate. The above is to give you a reasonable idea of what to expect. 

To apply online for a Second Act Home Equity Line in your father's name you can visit https://secondact.com/apply-online 


With regards to existing banks:

    I'd start by telling them the purpose, which post 2008, is very important: that dad is moving out of the house and he needs a bridge; that this loan would not be open long, maybe 6 months;

    Ask the Lender about "Debt to Income". Say "I will tell you what my dad's income is. Can we do a 'back-of-the-envelope' Debt-to-Income calculation before he applies so we can see if he is eligible? I don't want to start this process only to be told his 'Debt to Income' doesn't work."

    Ask the Lender:

        What are ways you have seen things hit snags with these kinds of applications? 

        Is there a minimum hold period where we have to keep the line open? 

        Is there a pre-payment penalty if we pay off early, before that minimum period has come?

        What are the processing fees on a line like this? The other lender I spoke with said they had:

            Title Processing Fee

            Title Insurance Fee

            Credit Report Pull Fee

            Virtual Appraisal Fee

            Possibly a local county recording tax the Title company would have to sort through

            How long would this take?

            Is it Ok that he is about to move out of the home?


We usually see the hangups with local banks being:

(1) the fact the senior is about to move out of their home;

(2) that the home is about to be listed. Those two things are usually a snag; And

(3) If they aren't, the "Debt to Income" is the most important aspect where they get hung up. We have some unique accommodations to this that focus more on the value of the home and make approval usually a lot easier for seniors with lower income but good home equity value.

Press them on the above three. You do not want to get in a situation where they start an application only to disappoint you half-way in due to the above. 

OK Chris, it was my pleasure speaking with you. You have a great job. It was truly a pleasure speaking with someone in the education field. I went to grad school on a full scholarship that covered my tuition, books, room, board and food. And I will always be grateful to the financial office team that made that possible for me and helped me find that scholarship because growing up we were so very poor. Congrats on having an amazing job.

All my best,

Elias




